Vujo, good afternoon. It is a great
pleasure to have you here with me.
Finally someone
who played my sport.
Thank you for your time.
I want to say the same thing.
If someone had told me a few years ago
that I would have an interview with you,
I wouldn't have believed it.
I've seen a few shows. I must say
that you are doing it very well.
You are showing talent not only
in handball but also as a presenter.
It is my great honor and pleasure
to be your guest. -Thanks, Vujo.
Thank you very much.
Let's go back to your childhood
and your career, which was special.
Both as a player and as a coach,
but let’s go back to the beginning.
You were born in 1961 in Cetinje.
-In January, when it's the coldest.
Cetinje is a specific city,
so what was your upbringing like?
What were the living
conditions like?
It was a different time, I assume
other guest on the show said the same.
There was no internet, mobile phones
and everything that today,
as much as it helps us,
at the same time spoils the youth.
At that time, all the children in Cetinje
were involved in some kind of sport.
The first sport I started
practicing was karate.
Karate is a good supplementary
sport for all other sports.
Develops personality, discipline,
character. Coordination too.
Practicing karate, I got a blue belt.
I studied with the Jorga brothers.
They were famous karate fighters.
One of them was called Ilija.
Forgot the others name.
It was a great supplementary sport.
But I always preferred team sports.
My older brother noticed
that the basketball club Lovćen
is enrolling new members.
Such a poster was in all schools
that Lovćen was enrolling new members.
I went there with my brother,
and there were fifty children there.
They gave us the ball there
and we just shot.
When the training ended,
they told my brother
to come to the training on
Monday, and they thanked me.
It was a big
disappointment for me.
First, I can't play basketball,
and secondly that my brother
was better than me.
I couldn't admit that.
Then I continued practicing karate.
According to the old education system,
I was in the 7th or 8th grade.
Friends from school asked me
to come and play
in the school handball championship.
I asked them what they
were talking about,
I neither know how to play that sport
nor do I know what it is about.
But for some reason, I didn't have
anything better to do that day,
I got on my bike, and since
I had outgrown my jeans pants,
my mother shortened my bottoms.
It was some kind of shorts.
I went to the game too.
And they were missing one player.
I parked my bike and jumped the fence.
And that day we won.
And to me, victory is everything.
Even today when I play board games
with my friends, cards with my wife.
I don't care at all if I stole the joker,
I just want to win.
So the phrase the most important thing
is to participate doesn't exist with you.
That's right.
-But just how to win.
We won that game.
That tournament is over.
And Miško Popović, the best coach
in the history of Montenegrin sports,
came with a lot of authority
and didn't ask me if I wanted it or not.
He just told me: "Boy, come
to training on Monday at 6 p.m."
I was shocked.
Because I couldn't say no.
It doesn't exist.
Handball players were
the pride of the city.
They played in
the second federal league.
They played the Yugoslavian Cup,
so big teams came to Cetinje,
and they had hard time.
Clubs like Lovćen,
Goražde, Bitola.
These were all clubs
from the second league,
but the victory in Cetinje
meant a lot to them.
So I start training handball,
but in that year I grew quite a bit.
It is the period when children grow.
And I was even bigger than my brother.
One day my brother came and said
that the basketball coaches
invited me to come to practice.
-An old ailment is back.
There is no way I can balance
karate, basketball and handball.
I went to handball training first,
and then basketball.
Then both clubs registered
me for the first team.
So how did you manage to coordinate
the training sessions?
There was one small gym in Cetinje,
then they trained
in different periods of time.
Or the handball players would train
outside on the concrete playground,
during the day.
And then the basketball players
would train in the hall in the evening.
Neither one nor the other knew
that I train both sports.
However, the first problems appear.
Let's say when handball players
would play in Bitola,
and basketball players
in Bijelo Polje.
Where should I go? Then the coaches
would agree where I should go.
I used to come back from Bitola
at 4 a.m., and these others play
in Bijelo Polje at 10 a.m.
And they start their journey at 6 a.m.
Then a whole busload of players
would come to wake me up.
I often didn't even know
where we were playing,
because I slept
while we were traveling.
I played both basketball and handball
for many years. -What years were those?
Until I was 16 or 17.
-That's already serious.
I played like that until
16 or 17 years old.
The problem was not only that
there were other athletes from Ulcinj
Podgorica, Tivat who also played
basketball and handball.
It often happened that we met
at a basketball game on Saturday
and at a handball game on Sunday.
I remember from Tivat Boško and
Čečun were fantastic basketball
and handball players.
At that time, sport was available
to everyone and there was no interest,
no money, and no big careers
were thought about.
We always suffered criticism from
our parents because they buy sneakers,
and when you play on tarmac,
you quickly tear them.
Then we shouldn't have asked
for new ones, rather,
you would cut a cardboard mold
and put it inside a tennis shoe,
but that too would wear out and all that
would be left was a hole in the sock.
Mother would then say: "How long
will you train, when will you stop."
We had a real fight, whether
to continue or give up the sport.
But fortunately I continued
to play sports.
Do you think that basketball
and training helped you achieve
good results in handball as well?
What do you think would have happened
if you had continued playing basketball?
Would you perhaps achieve
as good results as in handball?
I've never had a problem
with two-step or three-step.
I've never made the mistake of being
stopped by the referee for that.
I understood the difference
between the sports very quickly.
Basketball helped me to play better,
to have better combinatorics
in a smaller space and in movement.
That later helped me in handball as well.
I received an invitation from KK Bosna,
European champion to join their ranks.
There was a basketball coach who was
on loan in KK Mornar from Bar,
so he watched our games
and me as a basketball player.
At the same time,
I received an invitation from
Yugoslav junior handball team.
I didn't know what to do.
I thought about it and said that I wanted
to meet Jurin, Rađenović, Krivokapić.
To make sure if they are
men made od flesh and blood.
I wanted to touch them because
they were the role models I dreamed of.
First I dreamed and later I played
with them and won medals.
So that ruled in favor of handball?
When I appeared in Pula,
all the clubs from the Yugoslav
first league wanted me
to play for them.
That's when Goran Nerić appeared,
who was a junior member
of the Yugoslav national team,
and played for Željezničar from Sarajevo.
He had a conversation with me
and told me that it would be good
for me to come to Željezničar
because it is a big club,
and Sarajevo is an excellent city.
Then I thought I'd go,
and if I don't succeed in handball,
I will certainly have an invitation
from KK Bosna, so I can try basketball.
And if I fail in that too, I'll go back
and assemble washing machines.
Back then, Obod was a big factory.
But there was something
I hadn't realized I said.
And that is that Veselin Vuković
is also Montenegrin,
his father is a military person
and we hung out at that gathering.
He convinced me to come to Šabac.
I couldn't believe what he was saying.
He wanted me to promise him
that I would come to Šabac.
I told him to leave me alone.
Later we were at a party one night
and I told him I would come.
He demanded that I promise.
And I promised him.
When I promised Nerić, I remembered
that I had promised Vuković the same.
What should I do now?
In the morning at breakfast I said
I regret that I will not come
to Sarajevo and I asked him
to apologize to the people.
He asked why. I couldn't explain
to him any further.
So it ended and each of us went home.
But we forgot to exchange phone numbers.
And then what did Vuković do?
He took the telephone
directory of Cetinje.
He was looking for the Vujović.
And there are many of them in Cetinje.
He called and asked people if anyone
in their family was involved in sports.
They would say no.
And if you know any of your relatives,
they would answer that they don't know.
He called one, another, a fifth,
and finally one of them said
that Krsto's boy was playing something,
both brothers practice something.
He asked if they knew the number
and they gave it to him.
One day the phone rang
and I answered, and he said:
"Vujo, where are you?"
I asked who was calling me.
He says: "Vuk".
I've been looking for you for years.
He asked me if I was normal.
He asked me if the deal was still valid.
I told him I have a club.
He told me that their representative,
Aca Trifunović,
who is Don Vito Corleone
in the job, will come.
That's what we called him.
He was ahead of his time
and created a great generation.
He was the alpha and
omega of Metaloplastika.
Anyone who has not met him has lost
a lot in life. He was a monster.
But the administration and people
from Lovćen were angry
because someone is coming to
Montenegro to take players away.
They said he should be ashamed
of what he is doing.
I told him it wouldn't be easy.
But here comes Don Vito Corleone.
He threw his coat over his shoulder,
he arrived by plane,
a car was waiting at the airport.
He comes to our house.
He gave 100 DM to my mother,
100 DM to my sister,
and a bottle of whiskey
for my father.
And salaries at that time were 200 DM.
They didn't know what was going on.
He said he came because of me.
Father asked: "For whom"?
Aco says: "Because of Veselin".
Where did you come from?
-From Šabac.
You came from Šabac to Cetinje
because of my son? -Yes.
You came all the way for him?
-Well, yes.
So, is he that good?
-He is the best. -Who is the best?
Well, your son.
My father told me to come to him.
That was the moment
of the greatest love he showed me.
He grabbed my hair and asked: "How
come I don't know anything about it".
I just kept quiet.
The first part was successfully
completed, but now we need to talk
to the administration of Lovćen.
There were all present, chairman
of the committee and everyone else.
Everyone looked at us strangely.
Aco came and greeted them all nicely.
Before they said anything,
he said the following.
I know how well you work
and how you work with these children.
Congratulations to you,
you are phenomenal.
I will give you five million
dinars in compensation,
and I will also give you five million
for him in equipment.
All honor to you, so to speak,
you are excellent.
So I am the first player in history
to be compensated.
Compensation. They sold me easily.
They sold me easily.
After that, I went to Šabac.
After 10 million dinars,
Vuja could go.
It was not a small sum of money.
-I believe not.
My only condition was
to buy a car Zastava 101.
I thought when I sat in that car,
no one would be
more important than me.
My father was a chauffeur
or rather a professional driver.
He drove all his life.
When he was away I would
always sleep on his pillow,
because it smelled
of oil and gasoline.
Because I missed him so much,
and I was not aware of it.
Life was hard at that time.
There were five of us in the house,
and only my father worked.
We somehow survived.
I remember that flour was transported
by train from Bačka Palanka
to the port of Bar.
My mother would sometimes
say to ny father:
"Krsto, can you steal a bag of flour?”
What will happen if someone
sees me doing this?
I didn't understand what
that meant at the time.
Only later did I understand his words.
And I always remembered that.
Not to embarrass the family.
Times are different today.
When someone goes to prison,
the family prepares a party for him
as if he was going to the army.
What used to be a shame,
today people are proud of it.
Unfortunately, but that's how it is.
Do you think that the mentality
of people from Cetinje
helped you reach those
heights during your career?
Do you think it is an important
part of your career?
I don't know if you met
anyone Cetinje,
maybe Petar Kapisoda or
Goran Đukanović? -Yes, I did.
They're quick thinking people
and have above-average intelligence.
Look, maybe people from Nikšić and
Berane talk about themselves this way,
but I'm speaking from my experience.
When you talk about Cetinje,
or if you ask someone where they're
from, they might say Podgorica,
Nikšić, or Tivat. But when you
ask someone from Cetinje,
they'll tell you with an air of pride
as if they're above everyone else.
Just from that, you're coming
from a place of power.
Cetinje has a history engraved
in stone foundations.
It was the capital.
-It was the capital.
"This rock here is where this person
died," "Here we killed a Turk,"
"Here is where that battle was held."
Everything is history,
everything is written down,
and all those details teach you
which path you should take,
and that you have to be the best.
Average is not acceptable, and neither
is bad, and this is made crystal clear.
The people there have
a specific type of humor.
My village, Mikulići, not too many years
ago, got access to electricity.
And the rascals from Cetinje were
sitting around, and one of them asked,
"Hey, did you hear
Mikulići got electricity?"
Another says, "Now you'll hear the
complaining, moaning, and crying there."
They ask him why, and he says
"They're about to find out Tito died."
That's how remote and obscure
location of my village is.
Just imagine who would come up
with something like that.
Or there is that one story of how a
person from Cetinje leaves the table.
He makes sure his cigarettes and lighter
stay on the table because if he doesn't,
the others will start gossiping about
him, but if he leaves them there,
the people will think he's going to
come back, so they won't even begin.
I have to say that that mentality,
way of thinking, and way of life...
Everywhere else in the world
when a kid falls and hurts himself,
gets a bruised knee or an elbow,
the parents ask the kid
"Did you hurt yourself? Are you in
pain?" But here, my father would say
"Why don't you look where you're going?
Do you want me to smack you?
I hope you break your leg next time."
You wouldn't even tell anyone
that you fell, it hurts, or anything
about it. You have to push through it
with your tongue behind your teeth.
That toughens you up from an early age.
That mentality definitely helped.
-Absolutely. Absolutely.
There were a lot of situations
where it did me more harm than good.
I can be hasty, I can be harsh, I don't
have respect for people with authority,
I don't admit when someone is better.
My friend told me once: "You wouldn't
let a disabled person pass you on the
crosswalk, let alone anybody else."
Whatever I do,
I try to be the best,
and I enjoy messing with the people I
defeat, humorously undermining them.
Let's move on from your childhood to
the first serious step in your career,
a kind of turning point,
I would say so, and I think you'd agree.
You went to Šabac in 1988/1989, where
this crazy generation was coming about.
It was in 1978. -Yes, 1978.
They called you aliens.
Please explain this project,
the relationships within the city, the
club, the sponsors, Metaloplastika.
I remember it even though
there is a big age gap here,
but even to this day, when
Metaloplastika is mentioned
in the world of handball,
it still holds a significant weight.
I think I can describe
all of that in one sentence.
I would trade 10 years of my life
now for 6 months from back then.
That's how good it was?
Maybe it was the carefree attitude
we had because of our youth,
maybe it was the compatibility
between the teammates,
maybe it was the results we had, maybe
it was the city's dedication to us...
Or maybe it was all of that combined.
-Yes, all of that combined.
When someone was sick or injured,
and I didn't manage to visit them,
I felt like I wasn't even alive
that day. That's how it felt.
The injured players would still be in
the stands to contribute in a way,
make jokes and shout comments,
and keep the chemistry we had going.
Thanks to the people who watched us,
we can live off of that high
of those months to this day.
In the city, we're still highly
valued and respected. Metaloplastika
still exists as a serious club.
The city decided that Metaloplastika
can't disappear. It has to be financed,
and no matter how little,
but it can't disappear.
It happened to a lot of big clubs.
They completely disappeared.
All of us players
remained in contact.
But back then, 2 hours before the game,
the sports hall would be packed.
You can't even imagine being teammates
with Isaković, with Vuković,
Bašić, Portner, and Kuzmanovski.
It was a privilege. -What ages were you?
Were you all close in age? -They were...
Isaković, Vuković and Rašić
were born in 1958.
Baško was born in 1960,
as well as Mrkonja.
Portner was born in 1962, and I in 1961.
We were very close in age.
Our sense of humor, professionalism,
our shooting hoops 3 vs 3...
We would go to the morning stretching
session, and in the afternoons,
we'd play Champions League game.
We were inseparable.
The coach couldn't keep us apart,
and we'd fight him when he tried.
It was something incredible.
Mini football was on Mondays.
We had a deal that if we won the match
on Saturdays, we'd play mini-football
on Mondays. Out of the 80 games,
we won 79 annually.
In the locker room
before the game, we'd say,
"Let's be careful and not get injured.
We have mini-football on Monday".
That was more "important"
to us than handball.
Obviously, we were just
joking around to ease the tension.
Isaković taught me
the first-step shot.
He'd make me do it
for days on repeat
so that when he would pass me the ball,
I could do a first-step shot.
That move is what made
my whole career.
When Baško would be
in front of the goal, he'd say:
"If you throw the ball from there,
I have no way of defending it,"
I thought, "If Bašić can't
defend this, then no one can."
And then he would tell me, "If they
raise their arms, where can you shoot?"
and I tell him, "I can only
shoot in that part there,"
and he'd think to himself,
"If Vujo can't score anywhere else
but there, then no one can."
We helped each other be better,
we had discussions,
we knew each other by heart. No words
needed to be exchanged in order for
things to work on the court. And
above all, we were really good friends.
That small place made it so that we
didn't have the kind of publicity
we maybe would've had in Beograd,
but we had each other.
Now, when I say small place, Šabac has
a population of 100.000/120.000 people,
but then Našice, which has
a population of 10.000 people,
makes me think that that's
what a small place actually is.
But the whole organization...
For example, Aca Trifunović,
who we've already mentioned,
never had written contracts for us.
What were the finances like
at that time? -Amazing. Amazing.
We were surely on the
same level as footballers.
We also had premiums.
They weren't tied to us winning
against somebody. That was silly.
The premiums were based on who to beat
and with what difference in scores.
Only then would we get our bonuses.
We never missed a single bonus.
We got them all. It happened
very often that we would get
just the right score needed for the
bonus. If it stated that we had to have
a six-score difference against Zvezda,
we would get exactly that.
I remember this one game
with IMT Rakovica.
There were four minutes until the end,
and we need to win by nine goals.
We rush to get it done in four minutes.
Everybody was rushing on the field,
we were asking for timeouts, and people
were wondering what was up with us.
In the end, we got
the nine-point difference.
This one guy, Luka Božanić, who was
writing down statistics for the club,
would say: "Guys, score 11 or 12...
But why exactly nine?"
He hoped we would get an eight,
so the money would stay in the club.
But it didn't start ideally. You came
in... -It didn't. The first year,
we were fighting to survive.
-To survive? -Yes, to survive...
Then, all of the younger players came in.
-That is right. We came because
Sead "Hafa" Hasanefendić
made a suggestion.
Portner, Mrkonja, and Bašić
all came into the club,
and that's when it started. -In 1982, it
started to get better and never stopped.
And it never stopped to this day.
I don't know how to explain that.
All of it was normal and logical to me.
I thought I was the best in basketball,
the best in handball, the best in this.
Whatever I did, I thought I was the best
at it. I was awarded with the
Popularity Award,
Best Sportsman in Yugoslavia Award,
World Player of the Year Award,
and all of that was normal for me.
I'm sorry for interrupting you.
When was the first time
you felt that you were "the" guy?
Did that happen in Metaloplastika
during the Yugoslavia championship
and Champions League,
or did it come with the success of
Olympic team? Which one was it?
-Ever since I was a kid, I have felt
like I was better than everyone else.
You just have that feeling,
especially when you have
the "Cetinje" mentality:
even if you're not the best, you are.
The Olympic games in Los Angeles.
I was 23 years old.
There were a lot of other older players
there. I was one of the youngest ones.
The late Branislav Pokrajac,
a genius,
asked me if I realized that I was the
leader of that team. -And you were 23.
I asked him what he meant
by saying I was the leader.
He just said I was the leader,
that the team listened to me,
and that I had to watch out for my
behavior, what I was saying and doing,
because all of them
would be looking at me.
I told him that was impossible,
and he said that we'll check it out.
He said: "Tomorrow morning,
when you come to have breakfast,
don't be the first one there,
but rather second.
And don't sit next to the player
who was already there."
Usually, you would come and see
a familiar face and sit next to them.
I come to breakfast,
and Rnić was already there.
I found another table and sat there.
He called me a crazy man
and signaled to join him,
but I told him I didn't like
his company, jokingly.
Other players started coming in,
taking their plates, and soon enough,
everybody started
taking a seat at my table.
Only once the table was full,
they started joining Rnić.
Pokrajac asked me
if I had seen what happened.
I told him that wasn't fair since half
of the team was from Metaloplastika.
He realized that I still
didn't believe him and told me:
"Every night, in front of our
hotel in the Olympic Village,
where all of the basketball, water polo,
and other players were hanging out,
you will act like the main character,
joking around, talking...
Since the curfew is at 11 pm,
you will go to bed 20 minutes earlier."
I agreed to that. When it was 10:40,
and I wanted to go to my room,
everybody asked me to stay longer. Five
minutes later, everybody else did, too.
Nobody was outside.
He said that now that I understand
my influence on others...
Everything was clear. -... now you
have to be the leader and know how to
lead your team. From that point on,
it was exactly like that.
Then, I started thinking
during warmup sessions.
I noticed that our goalkeepers
weren't touching the balls.
I made a deal with some other players
to shoot the balls where they knew
we would. That way, they would start
defending and get into the rhythm.
They wouldn't be of any use to us
if they weren't in the zone.
If I knew that some of my teammates
weren't in the best shape,
I would start pushing them with
assists to help them break through.
There were many things like those
throughout my career.
During practices, I would also
give the team many ideas.
I always knew I would be a coach.
I knew it from the first day.
You did? -Yes, 100%. That drew me
in so much that it was unbelievable.
A born leader. -Yes, but...
Even today, I am fascinated by
prominent personalities making
historical decisions and changing
thousands or millions of lives.
For me, it is happening on a smaller
scale. I am making decisions about
players and their positions.
Those are still important decisions,
just like when you're making a list of
who to take to the Olympic games.
With those decisions, you can
make or break someone's career.
In all that, I tried to be
as fair as possible
without being led by interests. I am a
strange guy, even when it comes to that.
I am always observing and analyzing my
players. I watch them leaving the bus.
Now, it is popular to wear headphones...
-All wearing Jordans... -Yes.
And then you have our physician who has
a lot of those big things to carry.
You see a player with his little bag
just walking by the physician.
And then you see another player
with his own big luggage coming to
help the physician. That's when
I know who is a fair player and
is fit to be a part of a team sport.
It doesn't matter that the first player
might play a bit better,
I will still choose the second one.
That's how I go about things in my life.
I like people who give themselves to
others and are willing to help.
I think that's the essence of life.
To get back to that golden age.
It all began with the Olympics.
Well, the Yugoslavia Championship was
for warming up and the Olympics came.
Yes, in 1982, I was part of the national
team that won the bronze medal
in the finals with Russia.
But I was the youngest of them all.
At the time, I was playing with
Jurin, Rađenović, and Krivokapić.
We won the junior world championship
in Portugal with Abaz Arslanagić.
After that, we arrived at the airport,
where we met the senior national
team heading to Switzerland.
They just switched me from one flight
to the other. -You were doing a lot of
things in parallel. -I came to some
sort of a combined national team.
There were some amazing players there,
Jovičić, Božinović... There were really
amazing, fantastic players. They
were giving out jerseys for the game.
All the players were real jokesters
and then there was me, a kid.
They gave me the number eight jersey
from Pavlo Jurin because I would be
giving it back soon enough.
Pavle was in the military at the time.
The meeting ended, and I stood at the
door and turned to them to say:
"I will give Pavle his jersey back,
but I will take one of yours, for sure."
Živković was panicking at the time.
We played some games beneath our dignity,
with Switzerland, Romania, Bulgaria...
They weren't giving their best.
But I was scoring left and right.
At the time, there was no Internet
to see club player lists.
The Yugoslavian sports magazine
said Pokrajac would publish the list
in three days. Then, in two days...
Days felt like years.
Finally, the title read,
"Pokrajac published the list."
I opened the right page and
covered it with a piece of paper.
I was slowly uncovering one-by-one
player on the list. -And?
I couldn't find myself, but I ended up
being last on the list. -The last one?
The last one. -My last name begins
with V, so... I was ecstatic.
That euphoria, that craziness...
I can't even explain it to you.
Back then, you couldn't read about the
dissatisfaction of the ones who didn't
make it on the list because
there was a lot of respect there.
Today, nobody pays attention
to the ones on the list,
but goes straight to trashing the
selector because someone isn't there.
That is what sales the papers.
Back then, dare to say
something against the coach?
You're out of your mind.
First, your parents would beat you,
then the coaches at the club,
the presidents, and everyone else.
Since we've came to that,
make a comparison for me
between today's athlete
upbringing and ours.
I consider myself
from the old generation.
Let’s forget technological advancements,
mobile phones, and all that.
How do you see it? How do coaches
and kids behave today,
compared to before?
It's surely different.
I was already
a serious national team player.
When Pokrajac calls me to play
at the Balkan Championship,
where we’re playing against Romania
or I don’t know who...
I liked shooting high.
I see that in my players too.
I try to correct that.
I ask them how many shots
they've seen go over the goal.
They say a lot. But how many
below the goal? They say none.
The goal is down there.
Even if the shot isn’t perfect,
the ball will go in, you understand?
Pokrajac tells me to shoot low.
I shoot high. The goalkeeper saves it.
He tells me to shoot low.
I shoot high again.
The goalkeeper saves it again.
He calls me over to do 20 push-ups
if I want to play again.
I sit on the bench. I think,
he's not going to make me do push-ups.
Saković tells me to do the push-ups.
I think it over and lie down.
Eight thousand people are counting.
One, two, three...
They’re counting in Romanian.
He puts me back in right after,
but the next shot goes low.
That’s one of the details.
Is that possible today?
-I don’t think it’s possible.
A parent would immediately
come to complain,
the newspapers would write about it.
Journalists would attack the coach
for mistreating the players.
How is it possible
for such a thing to happen?
I would be called
into a meeting at the club,
that this is not the behavior
of serious people...
That’s handball today.
Some people manage
in that environment, for sure.
Maybe I’m a bit old-fashioned.
Once I traveled to Minsk
with Zagreb handball players.
When we landed, we didn’t
have roaming. It’s Belarus.
We had to continue by bus.
400 kilometers.
The whole way, they were playing
charades, word associations, singing.
It was a joy to listen to them. Then we
arrived at the hotel and they found WiFi.
No more camaraderie,
no more chatting or anything else.
And it’s not just that. At one café
I saw a serious advertisement.
"Come in, you can talk,
we don’t have WiFi."
Four friends, each holding a phone.
Why did you even go out?
Coaches used to be more like
volunteers-amateurs.
They worked individually
with the players.
Now it seems to me that
there isn't as much space.
Or, how should I put it...
A handball school.
Money, energy, or people?
What are we lacking?
I always say that three things
are needed for success in sports.
Cash, money, and funds.
When you have those three,
everything goes smoothly.
In the handball school,
I see short, tall, skinny, fat,
boys, girls. The coach just gives
them a ball and they run.
They haven’t worked
on some things.
What matters is the
20 euros membership fee.
Everything is superficial.
-It’s superficial.
I’m not saying there aren’t people
who do it exceptionally well.
It seems to me that
the handball federation
needs to establish regulations
about handball schools.
It seems to me that in handball
some rules haven’t been written down
for how, what, when,
and at what age.
The coach is there,
the kids show up,
and he tells them to run
30 laps around the field.
Why 30 laps?
What’s the purpose?
To draw children in to love it,
to let them play first,
so they are satisfied.
This way, some will give up.
Half of them will give up
because of those 30 laps.
In water polo, it's known.
First you swim,
then you have to pull your arm out
and hold it above the surface
for a certain amount of time,
then the rest.
It’s the same in football.
That doesn’t exist in handball.
When you think about how many serious
people and educators there are,
you don’t have such an alphabet of sport.
Often it’s done at one’s discretion.
When I was a coach in Zagreb, I insisted
that parents do not come to practice.
I think they even wrote
that parents are forbidden to attend.
Parents can sometimes have a bad
influence on their child’s development.
There are parents who know
their child isn’t talented.
But to keep them off the streets,
they direct them to sports.
That’s correct,
as long as it’s possible.
But there are those who are
sickeningly ambitious.
They want their child
to be a tennis player.
A survey was done in Serbia among
parents of boys who play tennis.
"Would you agree for your children to
have a career like Troicki or Tipsarević?"
Out of 100 respondents,
89 said no.
The others want their child
to be like Đoković.
Do you understand how far this goes?
-That’s the core of the problem.
How far does it go?
My son and my daughter
don’t play sports.
I asked my son about handball.
"If I played handball,
they would tell me, look how he plays,
and how his father played?"
"I don’t need that."
He played a bit of American football
until he suffered a serious injury.
Sports didn’t interest
my daughter at all.
She was born in Barcelona.
That’s a completely different mindset.
Just take it easy.
Let’s go back a bit
to the gold Olympic medal.
I assume that’s the pinnacle for
everyone. Whoever experiences that...
What’s happening?
The Olympic Games in Los Angeles
were boycotted by Eastern countries.
The Russians didn’t play,
nor the Poles, or East Germany.
There was a stain
on that medal you won.
You won the medal,
but the best weren’t there.
That’s the first I’ve heard of it.
But to participate in the Olympics...
The World or European
Championship in any sport
is just for that sport. At the Olympics,
there are athletes from all sports.
It’s an incredible experience.
I remember spending
a few hours next to Michael Jordan
waiting to go out for the opening.
Yugoslavia was written with
a Y, like Yugoslavia.
We were second to last,
and they were last in the parade.
There were photo
opportunities, everything.
Later you remember those details.
There are Kićanović, Slavić.
They are legends.
You experience eating
next to Teofilo Stevenson,
maybe the greatest Cuban
boxer of all time.
He eats next to you,
you can talk to him.
When you win an Olympic medal...
When I won the medal,
I felt an incredible emptiness.
I thought about what more
I could achieve.
Do you understand?
-That was a boost for you,
only later came those 2-3 years
when everyone gathered.
Then I told myself
that was the peak.
My mother told me she wanted
me to climb my whole life,
but to never reach the top.
I asked her why.
"Son, from the top,
you can only fall down."
I wondered if that was
the period when I would regress.
Suddenly, you become a motivation
for everyone. Olympic champion.
You have to behave that way,
put in the effort,
because everyone wants
to beat you.
Everyone wants to be better than you.
Then your stubbornness kicks in. No.
That’s when the series of results starts.
-The culmination was in 1986.
For seven years in a row,
I was the champion of Yugoslavia,
five times in Spain, and for 12 years
I didn’t finish in second place.
World champion? -Yes.
Olympic champion.
What year was that?
Kudos for this.
-Thank you.
In a short period of time.
-That’s right. I was declared,
as the only handball player,
the Athlete of the year.
That was after 1986.
-That carries weight.
Do you know why? Because in the
jury are those who were athletes.
They aren’t journalists or anyone else.
Those who previously won
the title of best athlete, they vote.
-Especially in this sport.
It’s not football or basketball.
-After 1986 and the world championship,
I played well in the world championship,
becoming Athlete of the year.
The competition included
Dražen Petrović and Veselin Vujović.
Dražen Petrović, do you know
what that is? An icon.
They invite me there and I assume
if I’m invited, I’m the winner.
But, a moment happened.
When I was going to school in Podgorica,
the Montenegrin boxer,
Miodrag Perunović,
who was the Athlete
of the year before me,
boxed in an incredible way.
With so much heart and desire,
with so much fighting spirit.
I wanted to get into TV set.
For nine minutes,
the match lasted, I cried.
To give him my strength, my heart,
just to endure that match.
We came to the voting,
and the wotes of the jury are read.
I think to myself, if he didn’t vote
for me, I won’t accept this award.
He is obligated to vote for me!
That’s the mentality.
-He owes me that.
They read, Franjo Mihalić
for Dražen Petrović.
Dražen Dalipagić
for Veselin Vujović.
Miroslav Cerar for Petrović,
Vera Nikolić for Veselin Vujović.
Miodrag Perunović...
I hold my breath.
For Veselin Vujović.
That’s it. -That’s it. -It’s done.
I experienced that very emotionally.
Later, I was in that jury as well.
I regret that it stopped
for some reason.
Country became smaller.
At that time, Yugoslavia was
a breeding ground for athletes.
Can you imagine a handball team
from the former Yugoslavia?
I’ve been asked several times
to assemble
the ideal seven from all the players
from this region.
I tell them I can’t. Seven?
No chance. How to choose seven?
It’s the same in all other sports.
I believe that if that
country had survived,
Europe would have wanted
to play in our leagues. -Yes.
In all sports.
-Yes, in all sports.
With the award I received
for the Olympic Games,
I bought a color TV.
That was the award.
I think I even had to pay extra.
At that time, color TVs came out.
And now it's similar when it
comes to state awards.
In Serbia, it's different.
-A little better?
Not a little, but much better.
I think in individual sports,
it's 30 thousand euros or more.
Maybe it's even 50.000 in individual,
and in team sports, everyone gets 30.
We also have national recognition.
-That exists in Croatia too.
That’s three average salaries.
The Serbian government
pays that regularly.
That’s a very big deal.
Maybe not for most of those people
who have their own companies, but there
are people who have had problems.
That money meant a lot to them.
That’s when I bought a color TV.
That was in '82, '84, '86, and '88.
European titles with the club,
world championships,
Popularity Award. I got that too.
I still have it. TV magazine.
Miroslav Ilić, Neda Ukraden,
and I among them.
Guests at the concert of Isaković,
at the concert of Đorđe Balašević.
Do you know what that is?
That’s an incredible feeling.
The fulfillment of all dreams.
After that,
my Achilles tendon ruptured.
At the peak of fame. -What year?
-My Achilles tendon ruptures.
That was 1987.
I read the columns you wrote.
-1986-1987, we play against Rostock,
Champions League in Šabac.
I turn to run and feel
as if someone hit me.
I see there’s no one around.
I think something hit me. No.
I see a hole and there’s no tendon.
I have a recording of that,
everyone chants "God help."
I go to the hospital.
-That’s 27-28 years ago.
You’re ready for abroad.
When the ball is won, from
point A to point B, I see no obstacle.
It seems to me that no one
can hold me back.
That’s incredible.
I wondered why this
happened to me.
At that time, an Achilles tendon injury
meant the end in 99% of cases.
Your whole world collapsed.
-Telegrams started coming.
From the company "13. Jul,"
from Macedonia, from Zenica, INA.
Workers from that company
decided to cover the costs
of the operation for Veselin Vujović
anywhere in the world.
Houston, Moscow, anywhere.
I received over 30 such telegrams.
I have them all. I decided to have
the operation in Šabac.
Who operated on me?
Nebojša Popović.
One of the best handball players
that our country has produced.
He was an expert on knees.
He had never operated
on any Achilles tendon.
But I wanted him to operate on me.
On the day of the operation,
it may sound a bit strange,
a man died and on that body
he practiced how to cut.
That was his model.
I asked him what percentage
of 100 patients recovers.
He told me one or two.
I said I'm the one.
Again, the mentality.
The operation is not the problem.
Recovery is the biggest problem.
But even during that,
I had incredible treatment.
Workers from the Borovo company,
a shoe factory,
made a special shoe
for me with a raised heel.
You keep your foot elevated,
so the tendon remains shorter.
Then you have to raise the heel,
women know that.
I would walk like that
for maybe 10 days.
Then I went to the shoemaker and
he lowered the heel half a centimeter.
I walked like that again, trying not
to make any sudden movements
so the tendon wouldn’t rupture again.
After that I went
to Igalo to recover.
I worked with Minja Bulut,
a phenomenal therapist.
There were swimming pools,
salt water, skip, walking...
After the Achilles tendon injury,
I had a better recovery
than any athlete in the world.
-How did you feel mentally?
Were you depressed, feeling bad, or
were you always thinking positively?
I constantly had
a feeling that the tendon
would burst again
if I made any movement.
It was summer,
we played basketball in Budva.
But I was still saving
myself, dragging my foot.
There were many guys
from Budva there,
and there was great
competition in the game.
There was also a great rivalry between
people of Budva and us from Cetinje.
My brother, godfather and I
were playing,
and at one point there was a fight.
Was it a traveling or not?
And then a guy who was watching
everything said: "There was no traveling."
I answered him:
"Who asked you?"
I turned around and said to
a guy I knew was in control
of that group of guys: "Calm
down these guys of yours."
Then I turned around and saw
that that boy had hit my brother.
In that moment,
a stampede occurred.
50 people began to fight.
That was something unprecedented.
I ran after that guy.
There was one canal that took
waste water into the sea,
which was quite wide.
Running after him, I jumped
over it without any problem.
I reached him and then...
I won't go into details.
Maybe I shouldn't
have told this either.
When I calmed down
and everything was over,
I realized that I don't have
that fear anymore.
Imagine the moment that
brings me back to normal.
An abnormal moment
Of course we solved all that.
Even today, I have
many friends in Budva.
I'm even friends with the guy
who initiated everything
and we laugh when we talk about it.
That's an anecdote.
While I was in my sickbed,
a telegram from Barcelona arrived.
It read: "To our player",
although I have not signed
or agreed anything,
"we want a speedy recovery."
Was it the first
contact with Barcelona?
You heard something for sure.
Kalin who already played in Barcelona
called me, but it was nothing concrete.
We played against Barcelona
in the Champions League.
Then Isaković and Vuković left...
Metaloplastika was allegedly in decline.
While we were playing against Barcelona,
we, taught by bad experiences,
asked for bottled water
that hadn’t been opened.
I wondered if the bottle I was
drinking from had been opened,
but I drank the water anyway.
After that I developed a fever
and was taken to the hospital.
I got an IV there, but the
temperature did not drop.
The game was about to start
and I was still in the hospital.
Then I told them I was going.
Although there was opposition,
I showed up at the match.
We played well in the first half,
but in the end we lost by 6 points.
I was very angry, and I was always
a leader and an authority figure.
At that moment, I said to my
teammates: "Don't let anyone
make a statement to the newspaper,
to anyone, at any time.
You are not allowed to leave
the house for seven days."
"But we have to,
our children are here," they said.
No leaving the house
for seven days.
You can only go to the gym
and to your apartment.
During the seven days,
no one broke that rule.
After that we are "broke" Barcelona.
We were leading by 11-12 points,
and in the end, we eliminated them.
And if you watch the footage
of that game, you'll see those players
running up to me and hugging me.
They knew that I did it
for the good of all of us.
I didn't go out for
those seven days either.
I knew I needed to be focused.
Then, when I destroyed Barcelona,
that first contact actually happened,
then the tendon ruptured,
after which I thought
I was saying goodbye to everything.
-But they are calling again? -Yes.
Yes, they call, send telegrams,
but there is also a call
for mandatory military service came.
I could get rid of that,
because I had a serious injury.
I would receive a certificate, which
would release me from this obligation.
But, Krsto Vujović,
my father said:
"Son, no one was exempt from military
service in the Vujović household,
so neither will you be.”
I said, "But, dad..." "No discussion!"
"If you are not fit for the army,
then you are not fit for sports,
nor for marriage, nor anything."
God, what am I going to do?
So, I went to Kraljevo, where my
sergeant  was a certain Patarić,
whom I knew from
Pogorica as a coach.
During my military service,
Colonel Boteri allows me
to go to the Mataruška spa
by army car, Pinzgauer, to recover.
And the army, the people's army,
helped me a lot to recover.
Then representatives of
Barcelona came to my garrison.
They came while you were
in the army? -That's right.
The president of the handball section
Fraciscoo Ventura and Valero Rivera came.
Valero has been there before?
-Yes.
And Milan Kalina
as a translator.
We generally agreed that
I would come to Barcelona.
You don't have a manager?
You negotiated directly?
I directly agreed to
come to Barcelona.
It was more of a verbal
agreement, so to speak.
It was a transfer, of all transfers?
-That's right.
It was worth some then
70-80 thousand dollars.
It was nothing special.
But... Veselin Vuković
played for Atletico Madrid.
He called me and said: "Forget
Barcelona, ​​come to Madrid."
I remembered that he had called me
even when I was in Šabac
and said the same thing.
He decided my fate.
I decide to go to Madrid.
When Kalina called me, I said
that I had already agreed
with the people from Madrid.
-"So how, why", he asked?
I said: "Sorry."
The president of the club
and Vuković came from Madrid
and I signed a preliminary contract.
I don't even know what I signed.
Now it was already 150.000.
Then Kalina called me and asked
if I had signed the Fica federativa.
That's the gateway.
I replied that I didn't.
We will come to
your place tomorrow.
I said: "Don't!" He answered:
"We are coming tomorrow..."
When he came,
Valero now offered 250,000.
That had to be thought about. -Yes.
Vuković then told me: "You have
a call from Jesus Gil on the other line."
He was the genius
president of Atletico Madrid.
"HFe will talk to you."
He was speaking in Spanish so
I had no idea what he was talking about.
Vuković told me that they want
me there, they want me to play there
and no matter how much Barcelona
offers me, they will offer more.
My God, save me...
After we finished that
conversation, Kalina answered.
Please are you free at
5 PM because the president
of Barcelona Jose Luis Nunes
wants to talk to you?
He said: "No matter how much
Atlético Madrid offered you,
we will offer more." I'm already
starting to feel ashamed.
I couldn't bid any more,
I had to stop.
I then called my wife
from the barracks and told her:
"Please help me, because
I can't make a decision."
Tell me what to do."
She said: "Vujo,
people from Barcelona
contacted you when no one
knew if you would recover.
They believed you would.
I think it's still a better decision."
And that was the verdict?
Valero and Kalina came again and
I told them how much money I wanted.
I want for Metaloplastika
150.000 compensation.
How many years will I be in the club,
they have to pay for the preparations.
It's a million dollar transfer.
Valero and Kalina said
that they cannot decide on that,
but they have to talk to the president
who is on vacation in Palma de Mallorca
to see what he will decide.
Valero told me about it later.
Nunes hooked some apron
a Valero was completely professional,
he doesn't want to hold
a grudge against anyone.
He told him that the transfer
will cost almost a million
and that we cannot sign that contract,
because we have many
footballers that we pay less.
Nunes' wife was listening to all this.
At that moment, Jesús Gil
bought a little pony
and named it José Luis Nunes
to insult him.
She was angry that he was insulting him
and that he was going to take me to Madrid.
She asked Valero: "What is that
player like?" He answered: "The best."
"Is he worth that much?
He is worth."
I will give the money for him.
Actually, she is the one who
gave the money for my transfer.
Later when we would go on trips,
because she had no idea,
she would ask: "Is this one mine?"
I would answer: "Yes, that's me."
There is another anecdote.
The president called me Vuho.
Once I told him: "It's not
Vuho president, it's Vujo."
And he answered me: "Listen, please,
there is Real Madrid goalkeeper
Paco Buyo and your name reminds me
of him, so I can't call you that."
I said: "Okay, call
me Pepe if you want."
So it's a wonderful period.
I want some comparison.
You played for the two strongest teams
in the world, Metaloplastika and Barcelona.
Compare those cities
and the game for me.
When the Champions League was played,
where was the better celebration.
In Barca or Šabac?
You cannot compare Šabac
and Barcelona as cities.
Nor history or culture, etc.
Šabac was emotion, love...
Šabac was something that makes
you happy at all times.
The first? -That's right.
Barcelona was an organization,
wealth, splendor, power...
When you win the title you go out on
Nou Camp in front of 100.000 people.
Before the match, you go out to the
balcony and the same greeting follows.
You know you'll get a bonus, money
will be deposited into your account.
Sun, sea... - Yes, that was
the most beautiful period of my life.
But I also felt enormous pressure
and pressing in Barcelona.
There is no other,
you have to be first.
You have to be the best.
There are no comparisons.
You know what you're here for...
We play a game in which we win
by 10-15 points, and I play 60 minutes.
I ask Valera: "Okay, well,
why don't you give me a break?"
Listen, if I take you out, the audience
will slowly start to leave the hall.
But as long as you're on the field,
they expect you to do something
that makes them think it's okay
that they came to watch you.
So when you get a load, carry it.
There is no emotion here, that's clear.
But that welcome to Šabac,
when we won the title.
At the Belgrade airport, 30-40 thousand
people were waiting for us
The column of cars was almost
from the airport to Šabac,
maybe the whole of Šabac.
Maybe there was there
100-120 grand people.
Now someone will ask why I
say thousands and grand?
It's the same for me.
It was a collapse from the bridge
to the hall, something incredible.
And in Garnier, when we won
the Euro Cup with both
Barcelona and Vardar, it was nice,
but I will never forget
that first welcome with Metaloplastika.
That was something special.
That was among my people.
My wife put my son in my arms
over the fence,
there was my neighbor, my godfather.
Nothing can change that feeling.
When you played in Barcelona,
​​and we all know what Barcelona is,
a whole team with multiple sports,
were there people from this region?
Who did you hang out with?
Did you have someone close?
They were in the basketball club.
Boža Majković and Zoran Savić.
Handball club had Portner
and Vuković with me.
In other sports,
Željko Obradović in Joventut,
Ljupko Petrović in Espanyol, Milanović
and Andrić in the water polo club.
It was a serious colony
of Yugoslavs. We all hung out.
In general, that was at my place. I had an
really large apartment and a huge terrace.
And were you
connected with football?
and other sports, like basketball?
In Castell de Fels,
it's a coastal place,
one member of the
board had his own club.
It was a restaurant,
pool and beach.
And we athletes Barcelona we had
the privilege of being able to go there.
We didn't pay for parking,
the price of food was normal, etc...
And we often hung out with Johan Cruyff,
who has a special life philosophy.
I exchanged, then there were cassettes,
with the famous Hristo Stoichkov.
Hristo Stoichkov!
He gave me a cassette of Miroslav Ilić,
and I gave him a cassette of Lepa Brena.
Michael Laudrup was also there.
Together, they were just recovering
from injuries at that Medico service.
We had good relations
and before every game
they would leave us twenty
tickets for football matches
in the dressing room,
if we wanted to watch them.
When it was a little colder, and
they give us those seats at the top,
where it is dangerously windy,
I said I would watch the game at home.
When Vuković came to see me
in Barcelona, ​​he would dress warmly
and watch, because
he thought it was cool.
He would say: "Is it possible
that you are not watching,
and there it is, only 50 meters away?"
Because I lived nearby.
Even today, I support
the football and handball
club Barcelona and I am
really a big fan of them.
Now let's move on to the
coaching career, because,
Vujo, we need 3-4 hours for your career,
so we have to speed it up a bit.
I didn't tell you many
anecdotes or details
or some things, because
we wouldn't get there.
You have rich experience.
-You will also have to cut something.
In Greniers, I decided to end
my career  at the age of 34.
I am quitting.
I turned into a fridge.
Ice on the knee, ice on the
shoulder, ice on the tendon.
You feel when it's over.
We won the European title
at the Plaza de Mallorca,
where 30-40 thousand people chanted:
"Stay one more year."
You know how it goes.
I said I would stay whenever
they offered me a two-year contract.
But when they offer me a year,
it means that
they also think that
I have reached my limit.
That's why I won't
play that last year.
I wanted people to remember me
as a great sportsman,
and not to say how I dragged
myself around the field.
I returned to Šabac and immediately
became a coach of Metalopalstika.
Without days of coaching experience,
without anything,
I immediately became Tuta Živković's
assistant in the national team.
Metaloplastika played well,
I had a good projection as a coach.
At 34 years old, straight from sneakers
to coach and assistant coach
of the national team?
-That's right.
I also worked well as a coach
of some junior national teams
and I really developed in that direction
and it went fantastically well for me.
Everything was progressing great
when I got a call from Pick Szeged.
I went to Szeged and after the conversation
decided to take over Pick Szeged.
When I was returning, my cell
phone rang at the border crossing.
Jesus Revilla calls me from Siudad Real
and asks if you would be our coach?
Man, Spain, my language, history...
I call these people from Szeged
to tell them I gave them my word.
This is my wish, but if you insist,
I will stay and be your coach.
They say: "You are already
in Spain in your mind.”
I am going to Siudad Real.
That lasted half a season.
Then the second season starts,
we bring players.
We are making a story
for something bigger.
Something you write
in golden letters.
I am very glad about that.
The cup final against Flensburg
is coming. -What year? 2002, 2003?
I don't know...
Flensburg is coming...
And a few years ago, they played
Challenge Cup, with Flensburg.
A draw at home,
and they were overjoyed.
The rematch came and they
convincingly beat them.
They were even unpleasant.
They provoked them at a reception.
So, the players were in a subordinate
position. Somehow they were afraid.
Now, I put myself first.
Like, I'll be able to undo it.
The space is full, chaos...
In the first half,
they lead by one goal.
I enter the dressing room,
grab them by the neck.
How many finals have you played?
Come on, wake up!
We're back in the second half.
Their coach is Danish,
a fantastic player and coach.
He is constantly walking in the area,
reserved for judges. Nobody reacts.
I go over and push him.
The crowd starts cheering.
1, for us, 2, 3, 5 7, 8...
Mariano Ortega scores 8th goal.
I understood it as a personal struggle,
alone against everyone.
Mariano Ortega scores
a goal and falls.
When he fell, a German or Danish
player fell on him.
A mess ensues. I'm running there,
because we don't need chaos.
Bogdan Veta is grabbing me,
he was afraid of my character.
He rips my shirt and I take
it as an attack on me.
The players come up to me
and I hit them one by one.
A classic fight? -No, I hit them,
but nobody hits me back.
Once that's over, the referees
don't record anything.
But the Germans, of course,
reported me to the EHF
and punished me for 16 months.
I am complaining, they are
punishing me another 2 years.
Usually, the appeal is confirmed, but
they punish me for another 2 years.
We are traveling to Germany
and some neo-Nazi groups
are threatening me that I will not
be allowed to enter the hall
and that there will be reprisals.
We are in the hotel.
I'm getting ready.
I call my brother from Hamburg.
He will come with 3-4 huge friends.
They are two meters high, huge.
Brother, let's see who
will deny you entry?
When Domingo Diaz saw them...
"Vujo, could you please,
don't let them go,
because the players will react.
He will try to defend himself.
Please, you stay at the hotel."
We have a phone connection.
Watch the game and make moves.
The vice president stays
with me and I agree to that.
And what is happening?
Schumacher drives and the Germans
don’t participate in handball.
The match has started, but I can't
watch the match. I'm going crazy.
I am calling my wife who is in
Spain, she watch the match.
I ask her about the result.
She says 5:1. "How?",
I ask her: "Who scores goals?"
She says:
"He is beautiful, the Dane."
Who plays against him?
She says: "Pogorelov".
I tell her to put Ortega
on two, as a defense.
I run the match with my
wife, using the phone.
The second half was on.
We win the title.
I tell the president
and everyone knows.
We get awards, we celebrate...
They call my wife and give her a watch.
Like, she deserves the title.
They tell me: "Vujo, you have been
punished and you can’t play."
Juan Dios is coming,
and I'm coming to Serbia.
I am becoming the head coach
of Serbia and Montenegro.
There were competitions
and world championships.
Again, it’s at a very good level.
I am head coach at all levels.
For junior, senior and
cadet national teams.
We were declared as the best
EHF national team in the world,
because we were fourth
at the World Cup.
Juniors were second in the world,
cadets champions of Europe.
All in all, we were the best.
Also, I receive medal
"The Merit to the Nation".
In all this, Serbia and
Montenegro are separated.
Serbia would like me
to remain the coach of Serbia,
and Montenegro wants the same.
Difficult time... -Whatever I decide,
I will have a problem.
And then, I go to Macedonia,
to Vardar, to Mihajlo Mihajlovski.
One question?
Siudad Real is the club
where I collected the cream.
I have a feeling that this
happened in Vardar as well.
You made a team. Someone else
won the Champions League.
That's my feeling.
-I didn't mean to say that.
I never had a good team,
with serious players.
I had to deal with the mining
all the time.
I only had a great generation
in Zagreb, when I took over.
These were: Stepančić, Šebetić,
Mandalinić, Pavlović, Valčić...
And then we played a fantastic
Champions League.
You played in the quarter finals.
-I had to work hard for everything else.
I was at Siudad Real,
it’s my own fault, I stand by that.
Are you sorry? -I'm very sorry.
I think my career would be totally
different, on a different level.
After that incident, my way
to Germany was closed.
I had a contact, I was planned
to take over Fuchse Berlin.
But I made an incident
with the German club.
I'm going to Vardar.  Six years
is the fight against Metalurg,
Lino Červar, madness.
They are champions, then we...
Incredible history.
Metalurg is making progress,
they are investing a lot of money.
Mihajlo tells me:
"A Russian has appeared.
He wants to invest in the club."
I asked him from 0 to 100%,
how much he would provide.
He said it would be 100%.
He invests so much.
We have a meeting tomorrow
that I have to attend.
I also came to the meeting,
Samsonenko is there, Mihajlo, too.
At first glance, I didn't like him.
He had a lukewarm greeting.
He started saying that he wanted
to bring Lacković, Šterbik...
I ask him why he wants that?
He better bring Landin...
And I continue to list younger players
at the end of their careers.
He says: "I want to people
know about me!" I tell him:
"When you have money, people
know about you, don't worry."
He tells me:
"My coaches listen to me."
I answer him: "You don't know
the circumference of the ball,
nor the dimensions of the field.
If I'm your coach,
draw a line and you say:
"Vujović, you did a good job.
The results are good,
and so is the end.
But don't tell me, who will play,
I don't allow that."
He stood up, muttered something,
said goodbye to Mihajlo and left.
Mihajlo tells me that it will be difficult
to reach an agreement with him.
But I don't want
an agreement with him.
It is a shame that he interferes
in the work of some coaches.
And he is sitting on the bench.
That's really funny.
And then came that golden time.
Lots of money, good players, everything.
And something similar again
in Siudad Real, but I wasn't there.
Maybe that's my destiny...
-But that came back with Slovenia?
Suddenly, a specific match.
I was in Croatia.
That's terrible, you were losing...
If you ask me how I won,
I can't explain.
And surely even Babić
doesn't know how he lost.
In some analysis,
which may not be accurate,
I said at the meeting
that Croatia was in a shock.
Zlaja Horvat missed a penalty,
in the last second against Norway.
You played after us,
you were tired.
We will run and try to fight.  Running
is not a problem for Slovenians, is it?
How long will it all take?
We get into a position where
we are nowhere, we don’t exist,
for the first 15 minutes.
Croatia leads, succeeds.
-It was 52nd minute 7, 8 difference.
I come to the dressing room
and I ask them do they know
that thousands
and thousands of people
are watching them at home,
their hearts are beating for them?
Isn't it a shame to play them like this?
Why don't they fight to the death?
Then it will be written somewhere
that they died bravely:
Veselin Vujović, Jure Dolenec,
Marko Bedželić...
And then someone will remember it.
Will you arrive at the airport and run
away without anyone noticing you?
That had no effect.
They lead by 7 or 8 goals.
I think, I'm the only fool, I’m jumping
around and making excuses.
But I remember that I got
a contract for two years.
How am I going to get those
guys back?
I will manage the game as if
there is only a 2 goal difference.
When we reduced the score,
I said: "Let's do two more."
And what is happening?
If Babić had put in Šebetic, Mihić,
and these youngsters,
who were on the bench,
they would have run over us.
He still held Cindrić, Duvnjak, Štrlek,
who were too tired even
before this match.
When we started to reduce the result,
it was too late for him to take risks
and then we start to run
and get control.
And in the end it ends the way it did.
It is an extremely emotional moment,
when that people and
that country was in question.
Even that reception, which was
organized in the best possible way.
Heads are falling in our country at
that time. It was difficult in Croatia.
When one goes down,
someone goes up.
Slovenians hired me
because of my character.
In the end, they were bothered
by my character, but that's who I am.
A transparent man.
When I'm in the mood, I smile.
When I'm angry, it shows on me.
I don't know how to foil.
That, may be,
my good or bad quality.
But that's me, a transparent person.
And I will always be like that.
I appreciate human values.
I want to die on my feet,
not on my knees.
And this decision I made is based
on my life philosophy.
Voja, we've reached the very end.
Time is running out,
I still have many questions.
This is the final question.
When you draw the line,
after player career
and the coach's career still lasts.
Is there any regret, failure, sadness,
something in your entire career?
Is there anything
you would like to change?
Most say:"I wouldn't change anything".
We all have something that
bothers us. Do you have that?
I would change all these stupid
and things I did,
thanks to my character.
Sometimes, when I watch videos,
I think I'm not normal.
You mean Siudad Real?
-And long before that.
Barcelona is my unfulfilled wish.
When Eric Massip became the director,
we agreed that I would be the coach.
But then Valero Rivera came in charge,
and we were not getting along.
He didn't accept me
as a coach in Barcelona.
This is a big failure
and a big wish for me.
Of course, I no longer harbor illusions
that I will be the coach of Barcelona.
I'm seriously old.
Then I made a couple of mistakes
while moving to Željezničar from Niš,
or Borac from Banja Luka.
These are mistakes in sport,
not human.
But, there I met wonderful people,
players, who I will remember all my life.
Those are some sporting failures.
All these are great experiences for me.
A good result and
success follow me.
People often think that with
my knowledge and my name,
I will extract of quality from them.
I have to think like other coaches.
Assemble the team
as I want and can,
and only then do I bear
the responsibility.
Taking responsibility for other
people's mistakes is really difficult.
That happened to me
both in Niš and Banja Luka.
But life is a road
with a thousand crossroads.
And you always have to decide
whether to go straight, left or right.
If no one advises you, you must
be making a mistake somewhere.
It is not always possible to guess.
Dear Voja, it was a pleasure
to listen to you.
Thank you for the pleasant company
and honesty in the interview.
I wish you a quick engagement
and lots of luck in life.
Thank you very much.